What's publishable

  Three things are worth thinking about as separate publication tracks:

  1. The compiler itself — software-paper / artifact track. This is the most concretely publishable thing right now. The repo is feature-complete through Phase 4,
  MIT-licensed, has CI, 142 tests, and a structured ontology of trust boundaries (T1/T2/T3) that the I-EIP Monitor docs make explicit. Good venues: JOSS (Journal of   Open Source Software — short paper describing the software, ~1000 words, rolling review, peer reviewed); NeurIPS Datasets & Benchmarks if you reframe around the
  moral-IR + 3 example scenarios as a benchmark; IEEE Software or JSS for a longer engineering paper. The thing JOSS will want is one paragraph each on (a)
  statement of need, (b) summary of the software, (c) state of the field — all of which you already have in the README.

  2. The I-EIP Monitor as a method paper. This is the more novel contribution. "Three-lens monitoring of moral state" + the BIP equivariance test as a
  probe-validity check + 5 named failure modes that escalate to requires_human_review rather than overruling DEME — that's a methodological story with empirical
  hooks (the divergence 0.70 / 6-direction-breaks result on nazi_attic is a concrete demonstration). Good venues: AIES (AAAI/ACM Conference on AI, Ethics, and
  Society); FAccT; NeurIPS Safety workshop; AI Safety Camp preprint then conference. The pitch is: most "alignment monitors" produce a scalar score; we produce a
  structured disagreement report that preserves the dimensions that justify or defeat a candidate action.

  3. The compiler + spec together as a foundational position paper. "Structure-preserving moral compilation" as a thesis: that scalar reward / scalar score / scalar   verdict discards the dimensions that are the moral content. This would slot into your existing Geometric Ethics book series and could go to Minds & Machines,
  Philosophy & Technology, or AI & Ethics (Springer Nature). Given how the AI&Law manuscript went last time, I'd suggest AI & Ethics as the lowest-risk first venue.
  What's not yet ready to publish: claims about trained probes (you have the calibration stack but no calibrated checkpoints against a real moral corpus), claims
  about silicon performance (the emit works but the bitstream is blocked), and claims about the activation lens on Atlas-hosted models (the source exists and the
  harness was verified to run, but no peer-reviewable experiment yet).

  My recommendation for the fastest publication: JOSS submission for the software (low risk, ~3 weeks turnaround) + an AIES-2027 method paper for the I-EIP Monitor
  (deadline typically early March; you'd want one real experiment on Atlas with a 7B model before submission). Both can run in parallel.



Engineering concerns I would fix next
1. Release/version skew

This is the first thing I would clean up. main appears to be at v0.7.0, but PyPI and GitHub Releases are at v0.4.0. That means a researcher who follows pip install erisml-compiler will not get the current DEME V3 Phase 6 state described in the README.

Action: cut v0.7.0, publish to PyPI, and add a top-level “version matrix”:

PyPI 0.4.0: Phase 4 I-EIP monitor
main 0.7.0: DEME V3 Phase 6 / rank 1-6 tensors / strategic proof
2. The probe path needs calibration provenance

The monitor docs are admirably honest about probe poisoning: trained ActivationProbe weights can be corrupted at training time, serialization time, or load time, and checkpoint provenance is the caller’s responsibility.

For a safety research tool, I would make checkpoint provenance a first-class object, not a recommendation. Every monitor trace should include:

{
  "probe_checkpoint_hash": "...",
  "probe_training_corpus_hash": "...",
  "probe_schema_version": "...",
  "calibration_metrics": {...},
  "calibration_date": "...",
  "model_id": "...",
  "model_weight_fingerprint": "..."
}

Without that, activation-lens claims will be hard to defend.

3. ρ = identity is fine for MVP, but not enough for I-EIP claims

The repo’s delta/equivariance docs say the current check uses ρℓ(g)=identity, with default rewrites limited to surface-form transformations like whitespace, case, and trailing period. That is a careful MVP choice, but it is not the full I-EIP representation-map framework from the whitepaper, which estimates ρℓ(g) over activation pairs and supports transformations like paraphrase, unit change, name substitution, order permutation, and role swap.

Action: create a Phase 5/6 milestone for:

transform registry
semantic rewrite validation
ρ estimation
calibration corpus hashing
per-transform thresholds
equivariance benchmark suite
4. Broad V3 fallback could hide regressions

The orchestrator catches ImportError and also catches broad Exception from the V3 bridge/higher-rank path, then falls back to the Phase 2 fanout tensor builder. That is great for demo robustness, but risky for research validity because a real V3 bug can silently downgrade the result unless the warning is inspected.

Action: add a strict flag:

eris-compile compile examples/nazi_attic.txt --rank 6 --strict-v3

In strict mode, V3 bridge failures should fail the command and fail CI.

5. The CLI and docs need one reconciliation pass

The README says the extractor stack includes Mock, Rule, LLM, and Probe; the orchestrator supports "probe" in CompileOptions; but the raw CLI --extractor choices shown by GitHub are only mock, rule, and llm.

Action: either expose probe in the CLI or document why the probe extractor is not exposed through compile yet.

6. deme-v3 dependency packaging needs tightening

The deme-v3 extra currently lists only numpy and comments that erisml-lib publication is pending / local editable install is needed. If the V3 bridge depends on erisml-lib modules such as Geneva and Triage, the install path should be explicit and machine-checkable.

Action: once dependency compatibility is stable, make it something like:

deme-v3 = [
  "numpy>=1.24",
  "erisml-lib>=3.0.0"
]

Or explicitly keep it optional but fail loudly in --strict-v3 mode.

7. The documentation still has some phase drift

SCOPE.md is valuable because it distinguishes built/stubbed/deferred, but it also still contains older caveats from earlier phases. For example, it says Phase 4 ships the monitor and identifies identity-ρ and surface rewrites; elsewhere, the current README says full DEME V3 Phase 6 is complete. That is not contradictory, but it can read as confusing because the repo evolved quickly in one day.

Action: add a single truth table:

Component                     Current status     Production status
Text compiler                 shipped            alpha
DEME V2                       shipped            stable-ish
DEME V3 bridge                shipped            alpha
Rank 3-6 tensors              shipped            alpha
Action/coalition axes          partial/stubbed    research
I-EIP monitor                 shipped            sampled audit only
Runtime gating                not shipped         future
Web app                       not shipped         deferred
Silicon emit                  shipped            no FPGA verification
8. The empirical validation story needs a named benchmark

The tests are broad, but the system now needs a benchmark that proves the central thesis empirically. I would create:

MoralTensor-Bench v0.1

Include cases like:

vow / promise / oath paraphrases
Nazi attic / murderer-at-door variants
third-party risk imposition
authority legitimacy swaps
coerced consent
medical confidentiality
whistleblower duties
corporate externality
military proportionality
AI reward-hacking redescription

Metrics should include stakeholder recall, commitment detection, legitimacy classification, third-party-risk detection, canonical-form invariance, tensor-rank preservation, and premature-contraction rate.

Fit with your broader thesis

This implementation is very well aligned with the thesis we developed:

Moral reasoning requires tensorial representation because obligations are relational, stakeholder-indexed, temporally extended, and defeasible.

The repo operationalizes that: the README explicitly rejects flat “good/bad/safe/unsafe” labeling and centers stakeholder identity, commitments, legitimate authority, and imposed risk.

The I-EIP extension is also in the right direction, but the current code is wisely conservative. The whitepaper says I-EIP does not solve alignment, cannot detect deceptive alignment with consistent internal representations, cannot catch goals pursued through I-EIP-compliant representations, and only checks transformations in the registry. The repo’s monitor design respects that by raising review flags rather than pretending the activation lens is a moral authority.

My recommended next milestone

I would make the next milestone:

v0.8.0 — Reproducible MoralTensor Benchmark + Strict V3 + Calibrated Probe Provenance

Minimum deliverables:

Publish v0.7.0 to PyPI.
Add --strict-v3.
Add probe_checkpoint_hash and calibration provenance to monitor traces.
Add a real ρ estimation module behind an experimental flag.
Add MoralTensor-Bench with 50–100 gold scenarios.
Add a make reproduce-nazi-attic command that emits IR, V3 tensor, DEME verdict, audit hash, monitor trace, delta report, RLEF record, and HTML report.
Add a “current limitations” block to the README matching the repo’s actual state.